# Welcome!

This is my personal website. Even though it is kind of empty right now, I plan to add content steadily. For now, feel free to check my professional [CV](https://pacosalces.github.io/docs/salces_carcoba.pdf). Also feel free to go to my public [repositories](https://github.com/pacosalces) for my most recent projects!

## Popular summaries of co-authored publications
_Disclaimer: The summaries below do not account for the full technical picture rendered by a peer-reviewed publication. I suggest avoiding literal interpretations, and direct any curious reader to the actual paper contents for more accurate information._

### "_Spatial coherence of spin-orbit-coupled Bose gases_"
#### (Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 053605)
Matter wave interference was among one of the first demonstrations in experiments with Bose--Einstein condensates (BECs) back in the 1990s. In a BEC, global phase coherence allows two overlapping sections from the same condensate to show interference fringes (maxima and minima of density) tracing the relative phase of the two wavefunctions. Furthermore, the contrast and duration of this interference pattern is subject to decoherence, where internal (thermal excitations) or external (magnetic field noise) perturbations modulate the phase randomly. While such a phase coherence may in principle exist in spinor BECs, or multi-spin component BECs, overlapping the two components of a spinor BEC does not render an interference pattern because the spin states are orthogonal to each other. In this work, we study spin-orbit coupled (SOC) BECs, where a pair of lasers modifies the atomic dispersion in a spin-dependent way resulting in the hybridization of the internal and external degrees of freedom (spin and momentum). Then. when a gas is in the miscible phase and its spin components are "ok" with overlapping each other, the SOC BEC may exhibit a "striped" phase. There, matter-wave interference is allowed by the non-orthogonal character of the SOC eigensatates. The effect is extremely subtle, and depends strongly on the dressing and miscibility, so we probe it by using the slight periodic density modulation pattern as a Bragg mirror. Then, shining a laser at just the right angle will reflect most of the light in the presence of stripes, allowing us to detect, and even trace the spatial coherence evolution of the SOC BEC. We find that this stripe-phase lives far longer than expected from the static description of the eigenstates, indicating better-than expected spatial coherence.

### "_Equations of state from individual one-dimensional Bose gases_" 
#### (New Journal of Physics 20 (11), 113032)
In this work, we study bosons in the one-dimensional (1D) regime, a regime in which dynamics are biased to happen only along one spatial dimension because there, bosons may start acting like fermions at very low densities. To achieve this, we start with an ultracold, three-dimensional (3D) Bose gas, e.g. a Rb-87 Bose--Einstein condensate (BEC) where three characteristic energy scales exist; 1) the thermal energy scale associated with the temperature of the gas, 2) the harmonic level energy spacing associated with our trap, and 3) the mean-field energy scale associated with the short-range interactions a single boson undergoes. In a trapped BEC in equilibrium, the thermal energy scale is often above the harmonic level spacing, but well below the trap depth and similar, and depending on the density, may exceed or not the mean-field energy. We freeze the 1D dynamics with an repulsive optical dipole trap (tweezer) shaped like a donut (LG-01 mode). The resulting trumpet-shaped potential squeezes atoms along two-dimensions, leaving only the longitudinal one free. Then, we determine the thermodynamic state of our 1D gas by taking images of the resulting density distributions. Because we know the shape of the trapping potential, we can connect the observed local density with a local chemical potential, and a global unknown temperature. Relating such state variables comprises an equation of state. We discover that loading the same 1D traps with warmer 3D gases results in colder 1D gases! Furthermore, by waiting for some time we see that the most energetic bosons leave the 1D trap, resulting in a net evaporative cooling. While the 1D temperature drops, the once degenerate bosons actually escape degeneracy! We speculate this is due to the inefficient chasing of the critical temperature in 1D vs 3D, where evaporative cooling results in an efficient approach trajectory to degeneracy.

### "_Second Chern number of a quantum-simulated non-Abelian Yang monopole_" 
#### (Science 360 (6396), 1429-1434)
Here we work with 4 of the 8 internal spin states in the hyperfine ground manifold of ultracold 87-Rubidium. After preparing an initial state, we drive it coherently along a parametric trajectory (i.e. described by the parameters of an external field) such that the final state acquires matrix-valued geometric phases. These matrix-valued phase factors do not commute with each other (i.e. non-Abelian) and reveal the structure of a gauge field in the abstract parameter space. Integrating the "flux" from the reconstructed gauge field strength counts the number of sources, represented by the "second Chern number". The importance of this number is that it characterizes the topological character of the non-Abelian gauge field, finding more relevance in less abstract settings where the parameter space is related to the crystalline band structure of an exotic material. 

### "_Charge exchange x-ray emission: Astrophysical observations and potential diagnostics_"
#### (AIP Conference Proceedings 1525 (1), 49-54)
Comets have tails which grow especially large when they come closer to the sun. A comet's tail will point away from the sun, regardless of its trajectory. But, what are they made of, and can we use that information to better understand them? Given how rare one of these objects visits our solar system neighborhood, accelerator physics and X-ray spectroscopy can teach us something. In this AIP conference proceedings, we report on Lymann-series ratios from direct X-ray calorimetry of charge exchange processes. To do this, we collide ions emulating the solar wind with neutral gas backgrounds representing the gases present in the thin atmosphere of a comet. The charged ions undergo a process called charge exchange, usually followed by an electronic decay event that radiates soft X-rays (keV). For the sake of spectral resolution, we use a calorimeter which at the cost of slow detection rate can resolve all the Lymann emission lines. For this study, C-6+ ions were used on three different neutral backgrounds.

# Support or Contact
You should know where to find me if you made it up to here. If not, feel free to email me at pacosc@terpmail.umd.edu

Clic aqui para [español](https://pacosalces.com/pages/welcome_es)
